---
title: "NN: Project Introduction"
permalink: /nn_intro/
layout: single
classes: wide
---

Taking inspiration from "Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a Language Model" (Hayes et al.), this project aims to predict Globally Harmonized System (GHS) hazard classifications with a SMILE encoded molecule as input, with further research aiming to generate new molecules and predict their classifications. A SMILE-encoded molecule is a representation composed of letters and numbers indicating atoms, bond types, and ring structures. Because SMILES strings behave like a language sequence, they are compatible with neural network architectures that process sequential data. The previously mentioned paper uses one-hot-encoding to read the inputs, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), and an autoencoder to generate predictions and novel molcules. Building on this idea, I propose encoding the SMILE representations by mapping each token to a unique integer and using a Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) network to predict hazard classifications from molecular structure. 

The motivation for this project exists within the biodefense industry. Engineered biological molecules pose a serious threat that modern technologies are too vulnerable to handle. Databases including PubChem and CHEMBL exist to track known biological assays along with their classifications. However, these databases only include known coupounds and has no way to predict or know syntheizable biological compounds. If the government were to come across a synthetized biological molecule, it can take days to identify the dangers it may posess. This delay can expose vulnerabilities especially when dealing with corrosive, toxic, or flammable compounds that are dangerous for humans and wildlife to interact with. A model that can predict these hazards early will reduce the vulnerability time so that humans will interact with these synthesized compounds accordingly. 

Aside from biological threats, this research can be used within AI-generated drug discovery. Many technologies exist now that use AI to generate novel drugs and proteins but lack the ability to synthesize and test their abilities in a lab. Having time to testing drugs and proteins in a lab requires a lot of time and resources. Therefore, researchers need a better idea of what drugs and compounds would be less hazardous and toxic to humans and wildlife. This approach would reduce the lab bottleneck and increase the efficacy in which compounds are being synthesized and tested. My project aims to predict the GHS hazards from compounds which could give researchers the necessary information to identify and synthesize safe and novel compounds. 

The selected network for this project can read the SMILE string forwards and backwards, meaning that it is able to retain context clues. This is particularly useful for the model to understand the chemical geometry. For example, four bonds on a carbon and the ring conformation. Geometry plays a huge role in chemistry and should be maintained or understood for the best results. To understand the geometry contained in a string, the model requires a lot of training data so that it can learn the subtle differences. Because the LSTM has a long-term memory component, it can retain long-range geometric details contained within each compound. Therefore, I believe that this type of model that uses memory is the best to use in these constraints. 

If successful, my project has positive implications in the biodefense and drug discovery industries. For biodefense, it can reduce the vulnerability period so that scientists can react properly to any synthesized drug. In drug discovery, this project could help minimize the bottleneck for experimental drug design. Many AI technologies generate valid and novel drugs, but molecular biologists do not have the time or resources to synthesize all the AI-generated drugs. Having a predictive model that works to classify a given drug as a GHS hazard pinpoints the drugs that could be experimented with. Overall, this project contributes both to safer chemical innovation and to improved preparedness against emerging synthetic threats.


